# 5 Statements

This chapter describes the static type checking TypeScript provides for JavaScript statements. TypeScript
itself does not introduce any new statement constructs.

## 5.1 Variable Statements

Variable statements are extended to include optional type annotations.

```text
VariableDeclaration: ( Modified )
    Identifier TypeAnnotation(opt) Initialiser(opt)

VariableDeclarationNoIn: ( Modified )
    Identifier TypeAnnotation(opt) InitialiserNoIn(opt)

TypeAnnotation:
    : Type
```

A variable declaration introduces a variable with the given name in the containing declaration space. The
type associated with a variable is determined as follows:

* If the declaration includes a type annotation, the stated type becomes the type of the variable. If
an initializer is present, the initializer expression is contextually typed (section 4.19) by the stated
type and must be assignable to the stated type, or otherwise a compile-time error occurs.
* If the declaration includes an initializer but no type annotation, and if the initializer doesn't
directly or indirectly reference the variable, the widened type (section 3.9) of the initializer
expression becomes the type of the variable. If the initializer directly or indirectly references the
variable, the type of the variable becomes the Any type.
* If the declaration includes neither a type annotation nor an initializer, the type of the variable
becomes the Any type.

Multiple declarations for the same variable name in the same declaration space are permitted, provided
that each declaration associates the same type with the variable.

Below are some examples of variable declarations and their associated types.

```typescript
var a;                          // any
var b: number;                  // number
var c = 1;                      // number
var d = { x: 1, y: "hello" };   // { x: number; y: string; }
var e: any = "test";            // any
```

The following is permitted because all declarations of the single variable `x` associate the same type
(Number) with `x`.

```typescript
var x = 1;
var x: number;
if (x == 1) {
    var x = 2;
}
```

In the following example, all five variables are of the same type, `{ x: number; y: number; }`.

```typescript
interface Point { x: number; y: number; }

var a = { x: 0, y: <number> undefined };
var b: Point = { x: 0, y: undefined };
var c = <Point> { x: 0, y: undefined };
var d: { x: number; y: number; } = { x: 0, y: undefined };
var e = <{ x: number; y: number; }> { x: 0, y: undefined };
```

## 5.2 If, Do, and While Statements

Expressions controlling `if`, `do`, and `while` statements can be of any type (and not just type Boolean).

## 5.3 For Statements

Variable declarations in `for` statements are extended in the same manner as variable declarations in
variable statements (section 5.1).

## 5.4 For-In Statements

In a `for-in` statement of the form

```text
for (Var in Expr) Statement
```

*Var* must be an expression classified as a reference of type Any or the String primitive type, and *Expr* must
be an expression of type Any, an object type, or a type parameter type.

In a `for-in` statement of the form

```text
for (var VarDecl in Expr) Statement
```

*VarDecl* must be a variable declaration without a type annotation that declares a variable of type Any, and
*Expr* must be an expression of type Any, an object type, or a type parameter type.

## 5.5 Continue Statements

A `continue` statement is required to be nested, directly or indirectly (but not crossing function
boundaries), within an iteration (`do`, `while`, `for`, or `for-in`) statement. When a `continue` statement
includes a target label, that target label must appear in the label set of an enclosing (but not crossing
function boundaries) iteration statement.


## 5.6 Break Statements

A `break` statement is required to be nested, directly or indirectly (but not crossing function boundaries),
within an iteration (`do`, `while`, `for`, or `for-in`) or `switch` statement. When a `break` statement includes a
target label, that target label must appear in the label set of an enclosing (but not crossing function
boundaries) statement.

## 5.7 Return Statements

It is an error for a `return` statement to occur outside a function body. Specifically, `return` statements are
not permitted at the global level or in module bodies.

A `return` statement without an expression returns the value `undefined` and is permitted in the body of
any function, regardless of the return type of the function.

When a `return` statement includes an expression, if the containing function includes a return type
annotation, the return expression is contextually typed (section 4.19) by that return type and must be of a
type that is assignable to the return type. Otherwise, if the containing function is contextually typed by a
type *T*, *Expr* is contextually typed by *T*'s return type.

In a function implementation without a return type annotation, the return type is inferred from the `return`
statements in the function body, as described in section 6.3.

In the example

```typescript
function f(): (x: string) => number {
    return s => s.length;
}
```

the arrow expression in the `return` statement is contextually typed by the return type of `f`, thus giving
type `string` to `s`.

## 5.8 With Statements

Use of the `with` statement in TypeScript is an error, as is the case in ECMAScript 5's strict mode.
Furthermore, within the body of a `with` statement, TypeScript considers every identifier occurring in an
expression (section 4.3) to be of the Any type regardless of its declared type. Because the `with` statement
puts a statically unknown set of identifiers in scope in front of those that are statically known, it is not
possible to meaningfully assign a static type to any identifier.

## 5.9 Switch Statements

In a `switch` statement, each `case` expression must be of a type that is assignable to or from (section
3.8.4) the type of the `switch` expression.


## 5.10 Throw Statements

The expression specified in a `throw` statement can be of any type.

## 5.11 Try Statements

The variable introduced by a `catch` clause of a `try` statement is always of type Any. It is not possible to
include a type annotation in a `catch` clause.
