# 8 Classes

TypeScript supports classes that are closely aligned with those proposed for ECMAScript 6, and includes
extensions for instance and static member declarations and properties declared and initialized from
constructor parameters.

NOTE: TypeScript currently doesn't support class expressions or nested class declarations from the
ECMAScript 6 proposal.

## 8.1 Class Declarations

Class declarations introduce named types and provide implementations of those types. Classes support
inheritance, allowing derived classes to extend and specialize base classes.

```text
ClassDeclaration:
    class Identifier TypeParameters(opt) ClassHeritage { ClassBody }
```

A *ClassDeclaration* declares a ***class type*** and a ***constructor function***, both with the name given by
*Identifier*, in the containing module. The class type is created from the instance members declared in the
class body and the instance members inherited from the base class. The constructor function is created
from the constructor declaration, the static member declarations in the class body, and the static
members inherited from the base class. The constructor function initializes and returns an instance of the
class type.

The *Identifier* of a class declaration may not be one of the predefined type names (section 3.6.1).

A class may optionally have type parameters (section 3.4.1) that serve as placeholders for actual types to
be provided when the class is referenced in type references. A class with type parameters is called a
***generic class***. The type parameters of a generic class declaration are in scope in the entire declaration
and may be referenced in the *ClassHeritage* and *ClassBody*.

The following example introduces both a named type called `Point` (the class type) and a member called
`Point` (the constructor function) in the containing module.

```typescript
class Point {
    constructor(public x: number, public y: number) { }
    public length() { return Math.sqrt(this.x * this.x + this.y * this.y); }
    static origin = new Point(0, 0);
}
```

The `Point` type is exactly equivalent to

```typescript
interface Point {
    x: number;
    y: number;
   length(): number;
}
```

The `Point` member is a constructor function whose type corresponds to the declaration

```typescript
var Point: {
    new(x: number, y: number): Point;
    origin: Point;
};
```

The context in which a class is referenced distinguishes between the class instance type and the
constructor function. For example, in the assignment statement

```typescript
var p: Point = new Point(10, 20);
```

the identifier `Point` in the type annotation refers to the class instance type, whereas the identifier `Point`
in the new expression refers to the constructor function object.

### 8.1.1 Class Heritage Specification

The heritage specification of a class consists of optional extends and implements clauses. The extends
clause specifies the base class of the class and the implements clause specifies a set of interfaces for
which to validate the class provides an implementation.

```text
ClassHeritage:
    ClassExtendsClause(opt) ImplementsClause(opt)

ClassExtendsClause:
    extends ClassType

ClassType:
    TypeReference

ImplementsClause:
    implements ClassOrInterfaceTypeList
```

A class that includes an extends clause is called a ***derived class***, and the class specified in the extends
clause is called the ***base class*** of the derived class. When a class heritage specification omits the extends
clause, the class does not have a base class. However, as is the case with every object type, type
references (section 3.3.1) to the class will appear to have the members of the global interface type named
`Object` unless those members are hidden by members with the same name in the class.

The following constraints must be satisfied by the class heritage specification or otherwise a compile-time
error occurs:

* If present, the type reference specified in the extends clause must denote a class type.
Furthermore, the *TypeName* part of the type reference is required to be a reference to the class
constructor function when evaluated as an expression.
* A class declaration may not, directly or indirectly, specify a base class that originates in the same
declaration. In other words a class cannot, directly or indirectly, be a base class of itself, regardless
of type arguments.
* The instance type (section 3.5.1) of the declared class must be assignable (section 3.8.4) to the
base type reference and each of the type references listed in the implements clause.
* The constructor function type created by the class declaration must be assignable to the base
class constructor function type, ignoring construct signatures.

The following example illustrates a situation in which the first rule above would be violated:

```typescript
class A { a: number; }

module Foo {
    var A = 1;
    class B extends A { b: string; }
}
```

When evaluated as an expression, the type reference `A` in the extends clause doesn't reference the class
constructor function of `A` (instead it references the local variable `A`).

The only situation in which the last two constraints above are violated is when a class overrides one or
more base class members with incompatible new members.

Note that because TypeScript has a structural type system, a class doesn't need to explicitly state that it
implements an interface—it suffices for the class to simply contain the appropriate set of instance
members. The implements clause of a class provides a mechanism to assert and validate that the class
contains the appropriate sets of instance members, but otherwise it has no effect on the class type.

### 8.1.2 Class Body

The class body consists of zero or more constructor or member declarations. Statements are not allowed
in the body of a class—they must be placed in the constructor or in members.

```text
ClassBody:
    ClassElements(opt)

ClassElements:
    ClassElement
    ClassElements ClassElement

ClassElement:
    ConstructorDeclaration
    PropertyMemberDeclaration
    IndexMemberDeclaration
```

The body of class may optionally contain a single constructor declaration. Constructor declarations are
described in section 8.3.

Member declarations are used to declare instance and static members of the class. Property member
declarations are described in section 8.4 and index member declarations are described in section 8.5.

## 8.2 Members

The members of a class consist of the members introduced through member declarations in the class
body and the members inherited from the base class.

### 8.2.1 Instance and Static Members

Members are either ***instance members*** or ***static members***.

Instance members are members of the class type (section 8.2.4) and its associated instance type. Within
constructors, instance member functions, and instance member accessors, the type of this is the instance
type (section 3.5.1) of the class.

Static members are declared using the static modifier and are members of the constructor function type
(section 8.2.5). Within static member functions and static member accessors, the type of this is the
constructor function type.

Class type parameters cannot be referenced in static member declarations.

### 8.2.2 Accessibility

Property members have either ***public*** or ***private*** accessibility. The default is public accessibility, but
property member declarations may include a public or private modifier to explicitly specify the desired
accessibility.

Public property members can be accessed everywhere, but private property members can be accessed
only within the class body that contains their declaration. Any attempt to access a private property
member outside the class body that contains its declaration results in a compile-time error.

Private accessibility is enforced only at compile-time and serves as no more than an indication of intent.
Since JavaScript provides no mechanism to create private properties on an object, it is not possible to
enforce the private modifier in dynamic code at run-time. For example, private accessibility can be
defeated by changing an object's static type to Any and accessing the member dynamically.

### 8.2.3 Inheritance and Overriding

A derived class ***inherits*** all members from its base class it doesn't ***override***. Inheritance means that a
derived class implicitly contains all non-overridden members of the base class. Both public and private
property members are inherited, but only public property members can be overridden.

A property member in a derived class is said to override a property member in a base class when the
derived class property member has the same name and kind (instance or static) as the base class property
member. The type of an overriding property member must be assignable (section 3.8.4) to the type of the
overridden property member, or otherwise a compile-time error occurs.

Base class instance member functions can be overridden by derived class instance member functions, but
not by other kinds of members.

Base class instance member variables and accessors can be overridden by derived class instance member
variables and accessors, but not by other kinds of members.

Base class static property members can be overridden by derived class static property members of any
kind as long as the types are compatible, as described above.

An index member in a derived class is said to override an index member in a base class when the derived
class index member is of the same index kind (string or numeric) as the base class index member. The
type of an overriding index member must be assignable (section 3.8.4) to the type of the overridden index
member, or otherwise a compile-time error occurs.

### 8.2.4 Class Types

A class declaration declares a new named type (section 3.5) called a class type. Within the constructor and
member functions of a class, the type of this is the instance type (section 3.5.1) of this class type. The
class type has the following members:

* A property for each instance member variable declaration in the class body.
* A property of a function type for each instance member function declaration in the class body.
* A property for each uniquely named instance member accessor declaration in the class body.
* A property for each constructor parameter declared with a public or private modifier.
* An index signature for each instance index member declaration in the class body.
* All base class instance type property or index members that are not overridden in the class.

All instance property members (including those that are private) of a class must satisfy the constraints
implied by the index members of the class as specified in section 3.7.4.

In the example

```typescript
class A {
    public x: number;
    public f() { }
    public g(a: any) { return undefined; }
    static s: string;
}

class B extends A {
    public y: number;
    public g(b: boolean) { return false; }
}
```

the instance type of `A` is

```typescript
interface A {
    x: number;
    f: () => void;
    g: (a: any) => any;
}
```

and the instance type of `B` is

```typescript
interface B {
    x: number;
    y: number;
    f: () => void;
    g: (b: boolean) => boolean;
}
```

Note that static declarations in a class do not contribute to the class type and its instance type—rather,
static declarations introduce properties on the constructor function object. Also note that the declaration
of `g` in `B` overrides the member inherited from `A`.

### 8.2.5 Constructor Function Types

The type of the constructor function introduced by a class declaration is called the constructor function
type. The constructor function type has the following members:

* If the class contains no constructor declaration and has no base class, a single construct signature
with no parameters, having the same type parameters as the class and returning the instance type
of the class.
* If the class contains no constructor declaration and has a base class, a set of construct signatures
with the same parameters as those of the base class constructor function type following
substitution of type parameters with the type arguments specified in the base class type
reference, all having the same type parameters as the class and returning the instance type of the
class.
* If the class contains a constructor declaration with no overloads, a construct signature with the
parameter list of the constructor implementation, having the same type parameters as the class
and returning the instance type of the class.
* If the class contains a constructor declaration with overloads, a set of construct signatures with
the parameter lists of the overloads, all having the same type parameters as the class and
returning the instance type of the class.
* A property for each static member variable declaration in the class body.
* A property of a function type for each static member function declaration in the class body.
* A property for each uniquely named static member accessor declaration in the class body.
* A property named `prototype`, the type of which is an instantiation of the class type with type Any
supplied as a type argument for each type parameter.
* All base class constructor function type properties that are not overridden in the class.

Every class automatically contains a static property member named `prototype`, the type of which is the
containing class with type Any substituted for each type parameter.

The example

```typescript
class Pair<T1, T2> {
    constructor(public item1: T1, public item2: T2) { }
}

class TwoArrays<T> extends Pair<T[], T[]> { }
```

introduces two named types corresponding to

```typescript
interface Pair<T1, T2> {
    item1: T1;
    item2: T2;
}

interface TwoArrays<T> {
    item1: T[];
    item2: T[];
}
```

and two constructor functions corresponding to

```typescript
var Pair: {
    new <T1, T2>(item1: T1, item2: T2): Pair<T1, T2>;
}

var TwoArrays: {
    new <T>(item1: T[], item2: T[]): TwoArrays<T>;
}
```

Note that the construct signatures in the constructor function types have the same type parameters as
their class and return the instance type of their class. Also note that when a derived class doesn't declare a
constructor, type arguments from the base class reference are substituted before construct signatures are
propagated from the base constructor function type to the derived constructor function type.

## 8.3 Constructor Declarations

A constructor declaration declares the constructor function of a class.

```text
ConstructorDeclaration:
    ConstructorOverloads(opt) ConstructorImplementation

ConstructorOverloads:
    ConstructorOverload
    ConstructorOverloads ConstructorOverload

ConstructorOverload:
    PublicOrPrivate(opt) constructor ( ParameterList(opt) ) ;

ConstructorImplementation:
    PublicOrPrivate(opt) constructor ( ParameterList(opt) ) { FunctionBody }
```

A class may contain at most one constructor declaration. If a class contains no constructor declaration, an
automatic constructor is provided, as described in section 8.3.3.

Overloads and the implementation of a constructor may include a public or private accessibility modifier,
but only public constructors are supported and private constructors result in an error.

If a constructor declaration includes overloads, the overloads determine the construct signatures of the
type given to the constructor function object, and the constructor implementation signature must be
assignable to that type. Otherwise, the constructor implementation itself determines the construct
signature. This exactly parallels the way overloads are processed in a function declaration (section 6.2).

The function body of a constructor is permitted to contain return statements. If return statements specify
expressions, those expressions must be of types that are assignable to the instance type of the class.

The type parameters of a generic class are in scope and accessible in a constructor declaration.

### 8.3.1 Constructor Parameters

Similar to functions, only the constructor implementation (and not constructor overloads) can specify
default value expressions for optional parameters. It is a compile-time error for such default value
expressions to reference this. For each parameter with a default value, a statement that substitutes the
default value for an omitted argument is included in the JavaScript generated for the constructor function.

A parameter of a *ConstructorImplementation* may be prefixed with a public or private modifier. This is
called a ***parameter property declaration*** and is shorthand for declaring a property with the same name
as the parameter and initializing it with the value of the parameter. For example, the declaration

```typescript
class Point {
    constructor(public x: number, public y: number) {
        // Constructor body
    }
}
```

is equivalent to writing

```typescript
class Point {
    public x: number;
    public y: number;
    constructor(x: number, y: number) {
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;
        // Constructor body
    }
}
```

### 8.3.2 Super Calls

Super calls (section 4.8.1) are used to call the constructor of the base class. A super call consists of the
keyword super followed by an argument list enclosed in parentheses. For example:

```typescript
class ColoredPoint extends Point {
    constructor(x: number, y: number, public color: string) {
        super(x, y);
    }
}
```

Constructors of classes with no extends clause may not contain super calls, whereas constructors of
derived classes must contain at least one super call somewhere in their function body. Super calls are not
permitted outside constructors or in local functions inside constructors.

The first statement in the body of a constructor must be a super call if both of the following are true:

* The containing class is a derived class.
* The constructor declares parameter properties or the containing class declares instance member
variables with initializers.


In such a required super call, it is a compile-time error for argument expressions to reference this.

Initialization of parameter properties and instance member variables with initializers takes place
immediately at the beginning of the constructor body if the class has no base class, or immediately
following the super call if the class is a derived class.

### 8.3.3 Automatic Constructors

If a class omits a constructor declaration, an ***automatic constructor*** is provided.

In a class with no extends clause, the automatic constructor has no parameters and performs no action
other than executing the instance member variable initializers (section 8.4.1), if any.

In a derived class, the automatic constructor has the same parameter list (and possibly overloads) as the
base class constructor. The automatically provided constructor first forwards the call to the base class
constructor using a call equivalent to

```typescript
BaseClass.apply(this, arguments);
```

and then executes the instance member variable initializers, if any.

## 8.4 Property Member Declarations

Property member declarations can be member variable declarations, member function declarations, or
member accessor declarations.

```text
PropertyMemberDeclaration:
    MemberVariableDeclaration
    MemberFunctionDeclaration
    MemberAccessorDeclaration
```

Member declarations without a static modifier are called instance member declarations. Instance
property member declarations declare properties in the class instance type (section 8.2.4), and must
specify names that are unique among all instance property member and parameter property declarations
in the containing class, with the exception that instance get and set accessor declarations may pairwise
specify the same name.

Member declarations with a static modifier are called static member declarations. Static property
member declarations declare properties in the constructor function type (section 8.2.5), and must specify
names that are unique among all static property member declarations in the containing class, with the
exception that static get and set accessor declarations may pairwise specify the same name.

Note that the declaration spaces of instance and static property members are separate. Thus, it is possible
to have instance and static property members with the same name.

Except for overrides, as described in section 8.2.3, it is an error for a derived class to declare a property
member with the same name and kind (instance or static) as a base class member.

Every class automatically contains a static property member named `prototype`, the type of which is an
instantiation of the class type with type Any supplied as a type argument for each type parameter. It is an
error to explicitly declare a static property member with the name `prototype`.

Below is an example of a class containing both instance and static property member declarations:

```typescript
class Point {
    constructor(public x: number, public y: number) { }
    public distance(p: Point) {
        var dx = this.x - p.x;
        var dy = this.y - p.y;
        return Math.sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);
    }
    static origin = new Point(0, 0);
    static distance(p1: Point, p2: Point) { return p1.distance(p2); }
}
```

The class instance type `Point` has the members:

```typescript
interface Point {
    x: number;
    y: number;
    distance(p: Point);
}
```

and the constructor function `Point` has a type corresponding to the declaration:

```typescript
var Point: {
    new(x: number, y: number): Point;
    origin: Point;
    distance(p1: Point, p2: Point): number;
}
```

### 8.4.1 Member Variable Declarations

A member variable declaration declares an instance member variable or a static member variable.

```text
MemberVariableDeclaration:
    PublicOrPrivate(opt) static(opt) PropertyName TypeAnnotation(opt) Initialiser(opt) ;
```

The type associated with a member variable declaration is determined in the same manner as an ordinary
variable declaration (see section 5.1).

An instance member variable declaration introduces a member in the class instance type and optionally
initializes a property on instances of the class. Initializers in instance member variable declarations are
executed once for every new instance of the class and are equivalent to assignments to properties of this
in the constructor. In an initializer expression for an instance member variable, this is of the class
instance type.

A static member variable declaration introduces a property in the constructor function type and optionally
initializes a property on the constructor function object. Initializers in static member variable declarations
are executed once when the containing program or module is loaded.

Initializer expressions for instance member variables are evaluated in the scope of the class constructor
body but are not permitted to reference parameters or local variables of the constructor. This effectively
means that entities from outer scopes by the same name as a constructor parameter or local variable are
inaccessible in initializer expressions for instance member variables.

Since instance member variable initializers are equivalent to assignments to properties of this in the
constructor, the example

```typescript
class Employee {
    public name: string;
    public address: string;
    public retired = false;
    public manager: Employee = null;
    public reports: Employee[] = [];
}
```

is equivalent to

```typescript
class Employee {
    public name: string;
    public address: string;
    public retired: boolean;
    public manager: Employee;
    public reports: Employee[];
    constructor() {
        this.retired = false;
        this.manager = null;
        this.reports = [];
    }
}
```

### 8.4.2 Member Function Declarations

A member function declaration declares an instance member function or a static member function.

```text
MemberFunctionDeclaration:
    MemberFunctionOverloads(opt) MemberFunctionImplementation

MemberFunctionOverloads:
    MemberFunctionOverload
    MemberFunctionOverloads MemberFunctionOverload

MemberFunctionOverload:
    PublicOrPrivate(opt) static(opt) PropertyName CallSignature ;

MemberFunctionImplementation:
    PublicOrPrivate(opt) static(opt) PropertyName CallSignature { FunctionBody }
```

A member function declaration is processed in the same manner as an ordinary function declaration
(section 6), except that in a member function this has a known type.

All overloads of a member function must have the same accessibility (public or private) and kind (instance
or static).

An instance member function declaration declares a property in the class instance type and assigns a
function object to a property on the prototype object of the class. In the body of an instance member
function declaration, this is of the class instance type.

A static member function declaration declares a property in the constructor function type and assigns a
function object to a property on the constructor function object. In the body of a static member function
declaration, the type of this is the constructor function type.

A member function can access overridden base class members using a super property access (section
4.8.2). For example

```typescript
class Point {
    constructor(public x: number, public y: number) { }
    public toString() {
        return "x=" + this.x + " y=" + this.y;
    }
}

class ColoredPoint extends Point {
    constructor(x: number, y: number, public color: string) {
        super(x, y);
    }
    public toString() {
        return super.toString() + " color=" + this.color;
    }
}
```

In a static member function, this represents the constructor function object on which the static member
function was invoked. Thus, a call to `new this()` may actually invoke a derived class constructor:

```typescript
class A {
    a = 1;
    static create() {
        return new this();
    }
}

class B extends A {
    b = 2;
}

var x = A.create(); // new A()
var y = B.create(); // new B()
```

Note that TypeScript doesn't require or verify that derived constructor functions are subtypes of base
constructor functions. In other words, changing the declaration of `B` to

```typescript
class B extends A {
    constructor(public b: number) {
        super();
    }
}
```

does not cause errors in the example, even though the call to the constructor from the `create` function
doesn't specify an argument (thus giving the value `undefined` to `b`).

### 8.4.3 Member Accessor Declarations

A member accessor declaration declares an instance member accessor or a static member accessor.

```text
MemberAccessorDeclaration:
    PublicOrPrivate(opt) static(opt) GetAccessor
    PublicOrPrivate(opt) static(opt) SetAccessor
```

Get and set accessors are processed in the same manner as in an object literal (section 4.5), except that a
contextual type is never available in a member accessor declaration.

Accessors for the same member name must specify the same accessibility.

An instance member accessor declaration declares a property in the class instance type and defines a
property on the prototype object of the class with a get or set accessor. In the body of an instance
member accessor declaration, this is of the class instance type.

A static member accessor declaration declares a property in the constructor function type and defines a
property on the constructor function object of the class with a get or set accessor. In the body of a static
member accessor declaration, the type of this is the constructor function type.

Get and set accessors are emitted as calls to `Object.defineProperty` in the generated JavaScript, as
described in section 8.6.1.

## 8.5 Index Member Declarations

An index member declaration introduces an index signature (section 3.7.4) in the class instance type.

```text
IndexMemberDeclaration:
    IndexSignature ;
```

Index member declarations have no body and cannot specify an accessibility modifier.

A class declaration can have at most one string index member declaration and one numeric index
member declaration. All instance property members of a class must satisfy the constraints implied by the
index members of the class as specified in section 3.7.4.

It is not possible to declare index members for the static side of a class.

Note that it is seldom meaningful to include a string index signature in a class because it constrains all
instance properties of the class. However, numeric index signatures can be useful to control the element
type when a class is used in an array-like manner.

## 8.6 Code Generation

This section describes the structure of the JavaScript code generated from TypeScript classes.

### 8.6.1 Classes Without Extends Clauses

A class with no extends clause generates JavaScript equivalent to the following:

```javascript
var <ClassName> = (function () {
    function <ClassName>(<ConstructorParameters>) {
        <DefaultValueAssignments>
        <ParameterPropertyAssignments>
        <MemberVariableAssignments>
        <ConstructorStatements>
    }
    <MemberFunctionStatements>
    <StaticVariableAssignments>
    return <ClassName>;
})();
```

ClassName is the name of the class.

ConstructorParameters is a comma separated list of the constructor's parameter names.

DefaultValueAssignments is a sequence of default property value assignments corresponding to those
generated for a regular function declaration, as described in section 6.5.

ParameterPropertyAssignments is a sequence of assignments, one for each parameter property declaration
in the constructor, in order they are declared, of the form

```javascript
this.<ParameterName> = <ParameterName>;
```

where ParameterName is the name of a parameter property.

MemberVariableAssignments is a sequence of assignments, one for each instance member variable
declaration with an initializer, in the order they are declared, of the form

```javascript
this.<MemberName> = <InitializerExpression>;
```

where MemberName is the name of the member variable and InitializerExpression is the code generated
for the initializer expression.

ConstructorStatements is the code generated for the statements specified in the constructor body.

MemberFunctionStatements is a sequence of statements, one for each member function declaration or
member accessor declaration, in the order they are declared.

An instance member function declaration generates a statement of the form

```javascript
<ClassName>.prototype.<MemberName> = function (<FunctionParameters>) {
    <DefaultValueAssignments>
    <FunctionStatements>
}
```

and static member function declaration generates a statement of the form

```javascript
<ClassName>.<MemberName> = function (<FunctionParameters>) {
    <DefaultValueAssignments>
    <FunctionStatements>
}
```

where MemberName is the name of the member function, and FunctionParameters,
DefaultValueAssignments, and FunctionStatements correspond to those generated for a regular function
declaration, as described in section 6.5.

A get or set instance member accessor declaration, or a pair of get and set instance member accessor
declarations with the same name, generates a statement of the form

```javascript
Object.defineProperty(<ClassName>.prototype, "<MemberName>", {
    get: function () {
        <GetAccessorStatements>
    },
    set: function (<ParameterName>) {
        <SetAccessorStatements>
    },
    enumerable: true,
    configurable: true
};
```

and a get or set static member accessor declaration, or a pair of get and set static member accessor
declarations with the same name, generates a statement of the form

```javascript
Object.defineProperty(<ClassName>, "<MemberName>", {
    get: function () {
        <GetAccessorStatements>
    },
    set: function (<ParameterName>) {
        <SetAccessorStatements>
    },
    enumerable: true,
    configurable: true
};
```

where MemberName is the name of the member accessor, GetAccessorStatements is the code generated
for the statements in the get acessor's function body, ParameterName is the name of the set accessor
parameter, and SetAccessorStatements is the code generated for the statements in the set accessor's
function body. The `get` property is included only if a get accessor is declared and the `set` property is
included only if a set accessor is declared.

StaticVariableAssignments is a sequence of statements, one for each static member variable declaration
with an initializer, in the order they are declared, of the form

```text
<ClassName>.<MemberName> = <InitializerExpression>;
```

where MemberName is the name of the static variable, and InitializerExpression is the code generated for
the initializer expression.

### 8.6.2 Classes With Extends Clauses

A class with an extends clause generates JavaScript equivalent to the following:

```javascript
var <ClassName> = (function (_super) {
    __extends(<ClassName>, _super);
    function <ClassName>(<ConstructorParameters>) {
        <DefaultValueAssignments>
        <SuperCallStatement>
        <ParameterPropertyAssignments>
        <MemberVariableAssignments>
        <ConstructorStatements>
    }
    <MemberFunctionStatements>
    <StaticVariableAssignments>
    return <ClassName>;
})(<BaseClassName>);
```

In addition, the `__extends` function below is emitted at the beginning of the JavaScript source file. It
copies all properties from the base constructor function object to the derived constructor function object

(in order to inherit static members), and appropriately establishes the `prototype` property of the derived
constructor function object.

```javascript
var __extends = this.__extends || function(d, b) {
    for (var p in b) if (b.hasOwnProperty(p)) d[p] = b[p];
    function f() { this.constructor = d; }
    f.prototype = b.prototype;
    d.prototype = new f();
}
```

BaseClassName is the class name specified in the extends clause.

If the class has no explicitly declared constructor, the SuperCallStatement takes the form

```javascript
_super.apply(this, arguments);
```

Otherwise the SuperCallStatement is present if the constructor function is required to start with a super
call, as discussed in section 8.3.2, and takes the form

```javascript
_super.call(this, <SuperCallArguments>)
```

where SuperCallArguments is the argument list specified in the super call. Note that this call precedes the
code generated for parameter properties and member variables with initializers. Super calls elsewhere in
the constructor generate similar code, but the code generated for such calls will be part of the
ConstructorStatements section.

A super property access in the constructor, an instance member function, or an instance member accessor
generates JavaScript equivalent to

```javascript
_super.prototype.<PropertyName>
```

where *PropertyName* is the name of the referenced base class property. When the super property access
appears in a function call, the generated JavaScript is equivalent to

```javascript
_super.prototype.<PropertyName>.call(this, <Arguments>)
```

where *Arguments* is the code generated for the argument list specified in the function call.

A super property access in a static member function or a static member accessor generates JavaScript
equivalent to

```javascript
_super.<PropertyName>
```

where *PropertyName* is the name of the referenced base class property. When the super property access
appears in a function call, the generated JavaScript is equivalent to

```javascript
_super.<PropertyName>.call(this, <Arguments>)
```

where *Arguments* is the code generated for the argument list specified in the function call.
